Master the 3 R of memory ,Register, Retreive and Retain. concentration is the handmaiden of registration. Proper classification is the key for effective retreival.
5 ways for improving permanent memory
a) use it or lose it
b) maintain interest
c)make it meaningful
d) think around it
e) relax and take a deep breath

4 ways to ensure memorizing
a) look for a interesting angle
b) Focus your attention
c) Add details to the item
d) Make association with something you already know

two methods we use to remember are 1) Recall and 2) Recognition

4 methods to recall and recognition
a)meaningfulness 
b) Association
c) Visual Imagery
d) Review

Enhance your memory by using all 5 senses.
Sight
Imagine what you read, see all the keywords and numbers in exaggerated format. Always see the bigger picture i.e not some important details which will lead to the bigger pciture.
A) take snapshots
b)use name tags
c)paint with color
d)locate dominant features
e)pattern recognition 

Sound
voice can conjure images of faces. Another way to rmemeber is rhyme (i.e pattern recognition)

Touch
Feelin something like the texture of a object can be retained in memory. Swimming and cycle riding is something thats motor memory and hence is the last to leave us. So when you want to remember something see if u can remember the touch and feel of the thing or associate it to touch and feel.Kinesthetic approcahes are a big boost to memory. writing a longer number in air with your index finger can make you remember it longer. 

Smell
Often we remember dishes that were served at marriages thru smell. We could remember directions to a food place by associating directions to it thru smell but that would be too complex for amateurs. The ad industry does this thru smells like "new car", "clothes", perfumes etc etc.

4 tips to enhance memory images
1) Exaggerate them
2) use humor
3) Add Action
4) Create Unique image


6 ways to remove memory blocks
when we forget something after learning for the first time, we forget exponentially, i.e the most on the first day. But after we review it once we forget it more slowly. memory gets stronger with use and weaker with disuse. Some memory blocks are
1) Anxiety 
2) depression
3) Rushing 
4) Tension
5) Interference
6) Chemicals - caeffeine

CREATE LINK STORIES AS MEMORY CHAINS

Memory works best thru association. Like remembering the first letter of every word and forming a new word . To remember a long list, form associations among items in the list and create new associations which enable easy recall, like for instance categorizing like items into new categories.
Visual and verbal elaboration.
Use Alphabets for linking items

Motivation is a powerful factor

Any form of drugs or stimulants upset the memory. As we grow old , our memory just gets more cluttered , analogy is a hash bucket with too many collisions , our brain somehow works like that which is why when we enlarge or exaggerate something and make it unnatural, it is easier to remember.

6 strategies for better learning
1) Space learning i.e- space out so that there is some time for relaxing
2) Take small bits
3) Recite material
4) Find relavance
5) Concentrate
6) Repeat

reduce interference in learning by making things as dissimilar as possible for eg 5 words should be as different as possible. Think of the hash bucket analogy.

Extrinsic memory
taking notes is a example of extrinsic memory. 
Imp * - time taken to mark out everything is justified only if you take time to review your notations to cement retention.

Keep the mind working at maximum throughout your lifetime.

Kinds of listening input
1) Hearing - purely physical , no control 
2) Attending - level of attention is psychological, depends on the payoff. We listen best when we attend carefully
3) Understanding - depends on the listener's intelligence and insight. feeling and empathy afffect understanding
4) Responding - answering questions and exchanging ideas can take place after carefull listening

Guidelines for effective listening
1) search for key words
2) Do ask questions
3) restate the speaker's message in native words.
4) Dont talk too much i.e don't run away with ideas
5) Don't jump to conclusions or snap judgements

barriers to listening
1) Comfort
2) visualize the speakers ideas as though they are in print
3) Concentrate
4) Culture

Hints for remembering
1) Picture what you wanna remember
2) use Humor or exaggeration
3) make the images vivid with color and action
4) Compare and contrast the info

Remembering workout
1) Don't interrupt
2) count to 3
3) Keep pace with the speaker
4) focus on whats being said

takin notes
1) use tape recorder
2) Take written notes for an immediate record of the highlights
3) rephrase what the speaker is saying into language that you are familiar with.
4) use a minimum of words
5) draw symbols ,arrows or lines to connect , visualize or illustrate the points you want to remember.
6) use initials if there is more than one speaker.

5 ways to sharpen listening skills
1) don't pick sides
2) learn something new curiuosity
3) Forge memory links
4) Don't judge the speaker
5) Don't be a know it all

7 ways to remember conversations
1) face  the speaker and make eye contact
2) use occassional nods and sounds that show you are listening
3) learn to listen to what you don't wanna hear without losing your temper
4) if you hear somethin fantastic, cross check 
5) don't give advice unless asked for
6) avoid giving examples from ur experience
7) never interrupt the speaker

rmemebering what you read
Comfort zone with good lighting, no distractions
best way to eliminate mental distractions to force yourself to bury yourself in the author's thought process instead of your own .IMPORTANT
Comprehension is dependent on concentration

improving reading recall
reading efficiently- i.e not reading using sub vocalizing
fast reading 
skim over info
summarize what u read
test urself
don't cram
share what you read

making others remember what you say and write
1) be literal and direct - avoid jargon, KISS
2) Repeat your main idea constantly  cos listeners tend to get distracted
3) Pause for questions or responses
4) use visuals 
5) tell them the benefits
6) summarize and remind the listener what you want them to remember


format for speaking
1) open with a short story or anecdote
2) tell them what you are going to tell them in the body of your talk
3) Interject a bit of humor 
4) deliver your message
5) interject another bit of humor 
6) tell them what u told them

8 strategies for speaking effectively
1) use concrete terms to engage the listener
2) include adjectives and adverbs
3) avoid pronouns
4) use vivid verbs
5) choose active not passive voices
6) reduce verbiage , don't use words that obscure content
7) vary the use of words for emphasis
8) Distinguish among the three types of speaking : tough talk, sweet talk and stuffy talk.

effective talking
1) look the listener in the eye
2) Eliminate hedges such as "kind of", "Sort of" ,"Quite a few"
3) Watch the mannerisms
4) Engage the listener by alluding to her.
5) avoid offensive gender or ethnic terms
6) assess the listener's knowledge and gear your speaking to this level  of understanding.
7) Seek feedback

Conversations that people remember
1) They were pleasant
2) The other people were easy to talk to
3) Familiar language
4) East going people
5) Speaker did not BS
6) Conversation ended on a positive note

Memorable Writing
1) Your opening statement should grab the readers attention and also provide him with some kind of benefit
2) Use language from daily language, rather than a thesaurus
3) Check the flow, it should be easy to follow and lucid
4) Cross out words , sentences, paras if they don't add meaning to your writing
5) mentally picture the results before writing
6) mentally picture the audience before writing
7) make your points from a easy to understand perspective.
8) Should be simple and lucid
9) length and tone of the message should be polished
10) business letters should be conversational.

Information presented should be simple, lucid, clear and entertaining.
tell em what you are going to tell em, tell em and then summarize what you told them.
Show, Don't tell.
Give your article a title that also provides a theme.
Let the readers know your qualifications are to write this piece , basically enamour and inspire the reader.
Include a teaser for the reader.

Develope attend-minded habits
1) Stay on track
2) do it now i.e avoid pro crastination
3) use regular fixed places for keeping things
4) To remember something different, use a different piece of jewellry or something that acts as red flag 


Develope visual reminders to remember better
Fine tune your powers of observation

learning to handle distractions and interruptions
1) Get your act together
2) Sustain your concentration 
3) Do the obvious
4) Master the Telephone- when seriosly working, use the answerin machine.
5) avoid tangents

inetrruptions
1) When interrupted be always sure to leave a cue or marker so as to resume the thread when done attending to the interruption.
2) Reduce the haste
3) Record the gesture with a picture
4) Organize your routines
5) Do it now
6) Reveiw promptly

10 basic principles of memory retention
1) Interest
2) Selection- don't mug up the API
3) Attention - Focus on what needs to be remembered
4) Understanding - 
5) Intention - make a effort
6) confidence - lack of confidence undermines mental abilities
7) Externals - Avoid ego related issues,look outside yourself 
8) Association - Link data
9) Organization - take time to classify similar things together, and stack em logically
10 ) Practise - practise the above 10

Mental creativity boosters
There are 6 kinds of intelligence
1) Verbal intelligence - Has to do with words and communication- talk more, communicate more
2) Logical thinking - ability to think things thru to its logical end -
3) Spatial reasoning - ability to imagine things from different angles,orient objects in space -  doodling , rearranging things in your mind, computer games
4) Knowledge of people skills - ability to understand people and understanding what motivates them, sizing up their feelings, getting along with people, ability to remember b'day, aniversary
5) Intrapersonal intelligence - Understanding yourself - asking questions about yourself, thinkin about what you like to do to relax, considering how you are different from others, listing accomplishments that you want to achieve in a specific time period.
6) Motor skills - remembering how to cycle and swim - keeping fit, pay careful attention while doing some physical activity

10 creative problem solvers
1) Generalize
2) Specialize
3) Analogize
4) Miniaturize
5) Change direction
6) Accesorize
7) Be Flexible
8) Suspend Judgement
9) Incubate
10) Realize